---
title: "Structure and mechanics of cockroach antennae confer flexibility and shape strain transmission for proprioception"
collection: publications
excerpt: ''
permalink: /publications/2025_JEB
date: 2025-10-15
venue: 'Journal of Experimental Biology'
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.250651'
citation: '<strong>L. Meng</strong>, P. McDonnell, K. Jayaram, and J-M. Mongeau. (2025). "Structure and mechanics of cockroach antennae confer flexibility and shape strain transmission for proprioception", Journal of Experimental Biology.'
type: 'Journal'
---
A broad class of animals rely on touch sensation for perception. Among insects, the
American cockroach uses a pair of soft antennae with distributed sensors to touch its
environment to guide decision making. During touch, forces on the antenna can
activate thousands of mechanosensors. To understand the content of this sensory
information, it is critical to understand how antenna mechanics shape the transmission
of contact forces. Here, we investigate the mechanical behavior and morphology of the
American cockroach antenna at the individual annulus level through experiments,
modeling, imaging with Micro-Computed Tomography (Micro-CT), 3D reconstruction of
antenna morphology, and finite element modeling (FEM). Our data and model
predictions revealed that the antenna flagellum bends according to a kinematic chain
model, with annuli connected by softer joints. Whereas the middle region of the
antenna consistently fractured under cyclic bending, the tip region remained intact,
revealing mechanical specialization along the antenna. Micro-CT imaging revealed an
invagination of the exocuticle at annulus intersections of the tip. To test the hypothesis
that this structure could enhance flexibility and robustness, we used FEM and
confirmed that the invagination allows for larger bending without structural failure
(buckling). Applying FEM to a morphologically accurate kinematic chain model of the
flagellum revealed the relationship between the local strain at the location of
campaniform sensilla, predicting the information available for antenna proprioception.
Taken together, these findings reveal biomechanical adaptations of insect antennae
and provide a critical step toward a mechanistic understanding of touch sensation in a
touch specialist.
